Part I — Foundations of Discrete Event Simulation

1. Introduction

1.1 What Is Discrete Event Simulation

	Discrete Event Simulation (DES) is a way to model and study how a system changes over time by focusing only on important events—instead of tracking every moment continuously. In DES, time jumps from one event to the next. An event is something that changes the state of the system, such as: a customer arriving, a service starting, a machine finishing a job, a patient leaving a hospital. Between these events, nothing relevant happens, so the simulation does not waste effort simulating every second or minute.

	A Simple Example: Imagine a queue at a bank: A customer arrives; The customer waits in line; A teller becomes available; Service starts; Service ends and the customer leaves. Each of these steps is an event. The simulation clock moves directly from: arrival time → service start → service end. We do not simulate each second the customer waits—only the moments when something actually changes.
	
	Why Use Discrete Event Simulation? DES allows you to: test ideas without changing the real system; compare scenarios safely and cheaply; understand bottlenecks and delays, measure performance such as waiting time, utilization, and throughput.

	In this book, we use Python and SimPy to implement Discrete Event Simulation models. SimPy provides the event engine, while the Discrete Event Simulation Kit (DESK) adds: reusable modeling blocks, structured experiments, tracing and analysis tools. Together, they allow you to build clear, modular, and realistic simulations with minimal code.

1.2 Why SimPy and Python

	Python is widely used in science, engineering, and data analysis because it is easy to read, easy to learn, and highly expressive. This makes it ideal for simulation models, where clarity and flexibility are more important than low-level performance. 
	
	Why Python?
	Simple and readable syntax
	Large ecosystem (statistics, data analysis, visualization)
	Easy integration with optimization and machine learning
	Ideal for rapid prototyping

	SimPy is a Python library specifically designed for Discrete Event Simulation. It is based on a clear and powerful idea: "processes are written as simple Python functions, and events advance simulation time".
	
	Why SimPy?
	True event-based simulation (time advances by events)
	Natural modeling of queues, resources, and delays
	Uses standard Python generators (yield) to represent processes
	Lightweight, transparent, and highly flexible
	
	Why SimPy + DESK?
	SimPy provides the simulation engine, while DESK adds:
	structured modeling blocks,
	reusable abstractions,
	experimentation and analysis tools.

	Together, they allow you to build clear, modular, and scientifically sound discrete event simulation models with minimal overhead.

1.3 From Academic Models to Modular Simulation Kits

	Traditional academic simulation models are often built as single, monolithic scripts: all logic, data collection, and assumptions are embedded directly in the code. While this works for learning and small studies, it becomes hard to reuse, extend, or validate as models grow.

	Modular simulation kits take a different approach. Instead of writing one-off models, they provide reusable building blocks (e.g., arrivals, processes, decisions, resources) that can be connected to form different systems. This shift brings key advantages:

	Reusability: the same blocks used across many models;
	Clarity: model structure mirrors real system logic;
	Scalability: systems built by composition, not rewriting;
	Experimentation: parameters and scenarios can be changed without redesigning the model

1.4 Scope and Philosophy of DESK

	DESK follows this philosophy by transforming academic DES concepts into a structured, extensible, and experiment-ready toolkit, bridging theory and real-world applications. By combining SimPy’s event engine with higher-level abstractions, DESK enables users to focus on system behavior and decision-making, not low-level simulation mechanics.
	
1.5 Target Audience and Learning Path

	DESK is intended for a broad audience that works with systems where time, queues, and limited resources matter.

	Target audience includes: undergraduate and graduate students learning discrete event simulation, researchers and analysts in operations research, logistics, and healthcare, engineers and practitioners modeling real-world systems, instructors seeking a structured and extensible teaching tool.

	Learning path:

	Beginners start by understanding core DES concepts and building simple models using predefined blocks.

	Intermediate users learn to configure resources, priorities, experiments, and performance metrics.

	Advanced users extend DESK with custom blocks, observers, and advanced analysis modules.

	This progressive path allows users to move from conceptual understanding to robust, experiment-ready simulation models, using the same framework throughout.

2. Core Concepts of DES

2.1 Entities, Events, and Time Advancement

	Discrete Event Simulation (DES) is built on three fundamental concepts: entities, events, and time advancement. 
	
	Entities are the objects that move through the system. They represent things such as customers, patients, jobs, calls, or vehicles. Entities may have attributes (e.g., priority, cost, type) that influence how they are processed.

	Events are moments when the state of the system changes. Typical events include: an entity arriving, a service starting or ending, a resource being seized or released, an entity leaving the system. Events define what happens in the simulation and when.

	Time advancement in DES is event-driven. Instead of moving forward in fixed steps (like every second or minute), the simulation clock jumps directly from one event to the next. If no event occurs during a time interval, that period is skipped entirely.

	Together, entities carry the flow, events change the system state, and time advances only when something relevant happens. This approach makes DES both efficient and well-suited for systems with queues, waiting, and shared resources.

2.2 Resources, Queues, and Delays

	In Discrete Event Simulation, resources, queues, and delays represent the constraints that shape system behavior.

	Resources are limited-capacity elements required to perform activities. Examples include servers, machines, doctors, operators, or communication channels. When an entity needs a resource, it must request it; if the resource is unavailable, the entity cannot proceed.

	Queues form when entities compete for the same limited resource. Entities wait in a queue until a resource becomes available. Queues may follow different rules, such as: first-come, first-served; priority-based ordering; preemptive service.

	Delays represent the time spent performing an activity or waiting. They are usually modeled using probability distributions to reflect real-world variability (e.g., service times, processing times, waiting before retry).

	Together, resources create constraints; queues capture congestion and competition; delays model the duration of activities and waiting. These elements are central to DES because they generate key performance measures such as waiting time, utilization, and system throughput.

2.3 State Variables and System Dynamics
	
	State variables describe the current condition of the system at any point in simulation time. They capture what is happening now and determine how future events will unfold. Typical state variables include: number of entities in the system, number of entities in a queue, resource utilization, status of servers (busy or idle), accumulated costs or revenues.

	The dynamics of DES emerge from how these state variables change when events occur. Each event (arrival, service start, service completion, departure) updates one or more state variables, which may trigger new events. 
	
	For example: an arrival increases the number of entities in the system, a service start decreases queue length and increases resource usage, a service completion frees a resource and may start service for the next entity.

	In Discrete Event Simulation, the system state remains constant between events and changes only at event times. By tracking state variables over time, DES allows us to analyze congestion, bottlenecks, stability, and overall system performance.

2.4 Priority, Preemption, and Scheduling Policies

	In many real systems, not all entities are treated equally. Priority, preemption, and scheduling policies define who gets served first and under what conditions.

	Priority assigns different importance levels to entities or activities. Entities with higher priority may: move ahead in queues, gain access to resources sooner, experience shorter waiting times. Examples include emergency patients, urgent jobs, or premium customers.

	Preemption allows a high-priority entity to interrupt an ongoing service. When preemption occurs: the current entity is paused or removed from service, the resource is reassigned to the higher-priority entity, the interrupted entity may resume later or restart service, depending on the policy.

	Scheduling policies define the rules used to select the next entity for service. Common policies include: First-Come, First-Served (FCFS), Priority-based scheduling, Shortest Processing Time, Custom rule-based logic.

	These mechanisms strongly influence waiting times, fairness, and system performance, and are essential for realistically modeling complex operational systems.

2.5 Performance Measures (WIP, Throughput, Lead Time)

	Performance measures quantify how well a system operates and are a primary output of Discrete Event Simulation. Key measures include:

	Work-In-Process (WIP): The average number of entities present in the system (waiting or being processed). High WIP often indicates congestion or bottlenecks.

	Throughput: The rate at which entities complete the system (e.g., customers served per hour). It reflects the system’s productive capacity.

	Lead Time (or System Time): The total time an entity spends in the system, from arrival to departure. It includes both waiting time and processing time. These measures are closely related and help answer practical questions such as: How congested is the system? How fast can it deliver results? How long does an entity have to wait?

Part II — DESK Architecture Overview

3. High-Level Architecture of DESK

3.1 SimulationModel as the Central Orchestrator

	In DESK, the SimulationModel acts as the central orchestrator of the entire simulation. It is responsible for: initializing the SimPy environment, registering and connecting all blocks, resources, and variables, controlling simulation execution (start, stop, duration), coordinating data collection, tracing, and analysis. 
	
	Rather than embedding logic inside individual components, DESK places global control and consistency in the SimulationModel. Each block focuses only on its local behavior, while the model ensures that: events occur in the correct environment, resources are shared consistently, statistics and observers are synchronized.

	This design keeps models organized, scalable, and reproducible, making it easy to run experiments, replications, and scenario analyses without changing the underlying system logic.

3.2 Separation of Model, Experiment, and Analysis

	DESK is designed around a clear separation between modeling, experimentation, and analysis, which is a fundamental principle of good simulation practice.

	The model defines how the system works: entities, resources, blocks, logic, and process flow. It represents the real system and should remain stable once validated. 
	
	The experiment defines how the model is used: simulation time, warm-up period, number of replications, parameter scenarios, and random seeds.

	The analysis focuses on what we learn: performance metrics, statistical summaries, confidence intervals, and comparisons between scenarios.

	This separation brings important benefits: models can be reused across many experiments, experiments can be changed without rewriting model logic, and analysis can evolve independently of simulation execution.

	By enforcing this structure, DESK promotes clarity, reproducibility, and scalability, making simulation studies easier to maintain, extend, and validate.

3.3 Event-Driven vs Process-Oriented Modeling

	DESK is built on SimPy’s process-oriented approach, which is itself grounded in event-driven simulation. 
	
	In event-driven modeling, the simulation progresses by processing events in time order.

	In process-oriented modeling, system behavior is described as logical processes (e.g., an entity’s journey), while the event handling is managed automatically.

	DESK combines both: users describe process flows using blocks and entities, SimPy handles event scheduling and time advancement internally. This hybrid approach provides: the conceptual clarity of process flows, the efficiency and correctness of event-driven simulation. DESK therefore lets users focus on system logic and decisions, without manually managing low-level events.

3.4 Design Goals: Modularity, Reusability, Transparency

	DESK is guided by three core design goals. 	Modularity: systems are built from independent blocks that can be connected, replaced, or extended. Reusability: the same blocks, models, and experiments can be reused across applications and domains. Transparency: events, state changes, and performance measures are explicit, traceable, and inspectable.

	Together, these goals ensure that DESK models are not only powerful, but also understandable, maintainable, and scientifically defensible.

4. Simulation Configuration and Execution Control

4.1 SimulationConfig: Duration, Warm-Up, Seeds

	The SimulationConfig defines how a simulation is executed, independently of the model logic. It controls when and how the model runs.

	Simulation Duration: Specifies the total simulated time. The model runs until this time limit is reached, ensuring consistent and comparable experiments.

	Warm-Up Period: Defines an initial time interval whose results are ignored. This removes transient bias, allowing performance measures to reflect steady-state behavior rather than startup effects.

	Random Seeds: Control the pseudo-random number generation. By fixing seeds, simulations become reproducible; by varying seeds, multiple independent replications can be performed for statistical analysis.

	By centralizing these settings, SimulationConfig ensures that execution control, statistical rigor, and reproducibility are handled separately from model structure, supporting clean experiments and reliable results.

4.2 Reproducibility and Random Seed Management

	Reproducibility is essential in simulation studies. DESK manages random seeds to ensure that: results can be exactly reproduced, different replications are statistically independent, scenario comparisons are fair and controlled.

	Careful seed management allows users to distinguish true system behavior from random variation, supporting reliable analysis and scientific validity.

4.3 Warm-Up Periods and Transient Removal

	Many systems start in an artificial initial state (empty queues, idle resources). Early results may not represent normal operation. A warm-up period allows the system to reach steady behavior before data collection begins.

	DESK supports: defining warm-up durations, excluding transient data from performance metrics, improving the statistical validity of results. This practice is fundamental for reliable discrete event simulation analysis.

4.4 Stability Checking and Model Validation

	Before trusting results, it is essential to verify that: the system reaches stable behavior, performance measures do not diverge, resources and flows behave as expected.

	DESK includes mechanisms to: check stability conditions, validate model consistency, detect logical or structural modeling errors. This ensures simulations are not only executable, but also meaningful and reliable.

Part III — Core Building Blocks

5. Entities and Attributes

5.1 Entity Lifecycle and Identification

	In DESK, an entity represents anything that flows through the system, such as a customer, patient, job, or order. Each entity follows a lifecycle from creation to disposal. The typical entity lifecycle is: 
	
	Creation – the entity enters the system (e.g., via an arrival process).

	Processing – the entity moves through blocks, requests resources, waits in queues, and experiences delays.

	Completion – the entity exits the system, and its performance data is recorded.

	Each entity is given a unique identification (ID) at creation. This ID allows DESK to: track the entity across multiple blocks, record timestamps for performance measures, enable detailed tracing and debugging, link entity-level attributes to outcomes. By clearly defining the entity lifecycle and ensuring unique identification, DESK maintains traceability, consistency, and accurate performance measurement throughout the simulation.

5.2 Static vs Dynamic Attributes

	In DESK, attributes store information about entities and influence how they move and are processed in the system. These attributes can be classified as static or dynamic.

	Static attributes are defined when the entity is created and do not change during its lifecycle. Examples include: entity type or class, initial priority level, category, origin, or scenario label. They represent inherent characteristics of the entity.

	Dynamic attributes can change over time as the entity flows through the model. Examples include: accumulated waiting or processing time, current priority (if updated by rules), costs incurred so far, routing decisions already taken. Dynamic attributes are typically updated at blocks (e.g., after a process or decision) and reflect the history and current state of the entity.

	This distinction helps keep models clear and organized: static attributes define what the entity is. Dynamic attributes capture what happens to it over time.

5.3 Attribute Assignment at Blocks

	In DESK, blocks are responsible for assigning or modifying entity attributes as entities move through the system.

	Attribute assignment at blocks allows the model to: reflect changes in entity state, encode business rules, influence routing, priority, and processing logic. For example, a block may: assign a priority level when an entity arrives, set a service type after a decision, update cost, time, or status after processing.

	This approach has two key benefits: Local logic: attributes are changed where the real-world decision or action occurs. Model clarity: the flow of entities clearly shows when and why attributes change.

	By handling attribute assignment at blocks, DESK keeps entities lightweight while ensuring that system behavior emerges naturally from the process flow.

5.4 Attribute Modification Along the Flow

	As entities move through a simulation model, their attributes can change dynamically to reflect what happens to them over time. This allows the model to capture learning, deterioration, accumulation of cost, changes in priority, or decision-dependent behavior.

	Attribute modification typically occurs: after completing an activity, when passing through a decision block, when interacting with a resource, when specific events or conditions are met. Examples include: increasing an entity’s waiting time or total cost, updating priority after a delay, marking an entity as processed, reworked, or rejected, accumulating service time or value added.

	In DESK, this is handled in a controlled and explicit way, usually inside blocks or event hooks, ensuring that: attribute changes are traceable, logic remains modular, entity behavior evolves consistently with system dynamics.


6. BaseBlock: The Fundamental Abstraction

6.1 Role of BaseBlock in DESK
	
	BaseBlock is the parent class for all modeling blocks. It defines common behavior such as entity handling, event hooks, and statistics collection.

6.2 Process Flow and Block Connectivity

	Blocks are connected to form a process flow. Entities move from one block to the next, making the model structure intuitive and visually meaningful.

6.3 Event Logging and Tracing Hooks

	BaseBlock includes hooks for: event logging, entity tracing, debugging and replay. This provides full visibility into simulation behavior.

6.4 Activity Priority vs Entity Priority

	DESK distinguishes between: entity priority (who should be served first), activity priority (which activity the system should schedule first). This separation allows fine-grained control over complex systems.

6.5 Block-Level Statistics Collection

	Each block collects its own performance statistics, such as: waiting time, service time, utilization. Block-level metrics support detailed diagnostics and bottleneck analysis.


7. Flow Blocks

7.1 CreateBlock — Arrival Processes

	CreateBlock generates entities based on arrival patterns or probability distributions.
	
7.2 ProcessBlock — Single-Resource Activities

	ProcessBlock models activities requiring a single resource, including queueing and service time.
	
7.3 MultiProcessBlock — Multiple Resource Requirements

	MultiProcessBlock represents activities that require multiple resources simultaneously.
	
7.4 DecideBlock — Conditional and Probabilistic Routing
	
	DecideBlock routes entities based on conditions, probabilities, or attribute values.

7.5 DisposeBlock — System Exit and KPI Collection

	DisposeBlock removes entities from the system and records final performance metrics such as lead time and cost.

Part IV — Resources and Scheduling

8. Resource Modeling
	
	Resources represent limited system capacity and drive congestion effects.
	
8.1 Resource Creation and Capacity

	Resources are defined by name and capacity, representing parallel servers or units.
	
8.2 Regular, Priority, and Preemptive Resources
	
	DESK supports: standard resources, priority-based resources, preemptive resources. Each models different operational realities.

8.3 Resource Units per Activity

	Activities may require more than one unit of a resource, enabling realistic capacity modeling.
	
8.4 Resource Naming and Tracing

	Explicit naming allows: detailed tracing, clear reporting, easier debugging.
	
8.5 Resource Validation and Consistency Checks

	DESK validates: resource availability, capacity consistency, logical correctness. This prevents silent modeling errors.

9. Queues, Priorities, and Congestion

	Queues, priorities, and congestion are central mechanisms through which Discrete Event Simulation captures competition for limited resources. In SimPy, priority queues allow entities to be ordered not only by arrival time but also by assigned priority values, enabling the modeling of urgent jobs, critical patients, or high-value tasks. Within DESK, this behavior is refined by the interaction between entity priority and activity (block) priority, where entity attributes determine queue position while block-level rules control how resources are seized and scheduled. As demand increases relative to capacity, congestion effects emerge, leading to longer waiting times, queue growth, and potential blocking logic, in which entities cannot proceed until downstream capacity becomes available. In more constrained systems, DESK also supports loss systems, where entities are rejected when capacity limits are reached, as well as retrials, where blocked entities wait for a delay and then attempt to re-enter the system. Together, these mechanisms enable realistic representation of crowded, priority-driven, and capacity-limited systems
	
Part V — Modeling Patterns and Examples

10. End-to-End Model Construction

	End-to-end model construction in DESK follows a structured and repeatable pattern: define entities and resources, assemble blocks, connect flows, configure simulation parameters, and execute experiments. This approach ensures that models are readable, reusable, and easy to modify for new scenarios.
	
	Example: A healthcare clinic model is built by defining patient entities, doctor resources, arrival blocks, consultation blocks, decision logic for referrals, and a disposal block for patient exit—all orchestrated by a single SimulationModel.
	
10.1 Model Assembly Workflow

	The model assembly workflow defines how a DESK model is created step by step, separating model logic from execution details. Typical steps include:

	Create the simulation environment and configuration
	Define resources (e.g., servers, machines)
	Instantiate blocks (Create, Process, Decide, Dispose)
	Connect blocks to define the flow
	Run the simulation and collect results

	Example: You first create a SimulationModel, then add a CreateBlock for arrivals, a ProcessBlock for service, and a DisposeBlock for exits, before calling model.run().
	
10.2 Connecting Blocks into a Process Flow

	Blocks in DESK are connected to form a logical process flow, mirroring how entities move through the real system. Each block sends entities to the next block once its operation is completed. This flow-based structure makes models easy to understand visually and conceptually, even without diagrams.

	Example: Create → Process (Service) → Decide → Dispose

	A customer arrives, receives service, is routed based on a condition (e.g., needs rework or not), and then exits the system.

10.3 Parameterizing Distributions

	Real systems exhibit variability, which DESK models using probability distributions for interarrival times, service times, delays, and routing probabilities. Parameters are defined externally so scenarios can be changed without altering model structure. This supports experimentation and sensitivity analysis.

	Example:

	Interarrival time ~ Exponential(mean = 5 minutes)
	Service time ~ Lognormal(mean = 8 minutes, std = 2 minutes)

	Changing the mean service time allows quick testing of staffing or productivity scenarios.

10.4 Encapsulating Business Logic in Functions

	Complex decision rules and calculations are encapsulated in Python functions, keeping blocks generic and models clean. This avoids hardcoding logic directly inside blocks and improves reusability.

	Functions can handle routing decisions, priority assignment, cost calculations, or attribute updates.

	Example: A routing function checks an entity’s severity attribute and sends critical patients to an emergency path, while non-critical ones follow a standard process—all without changing the block structure.

11. Case Study I — Hospital System

	This case study illustrates how DESK can be used to model a hospital or emergency care system, capturing patient flow, resource constraints, clinical priorities, and financial impacts in an integrated way.

11.1 Patient Arrival and Severity Modeling

	Patients arrive at the hospital according to a stochastic arrival process, typically modeled using time-based probability distributions. Upon arrival, each patient is assigned a severity level (for example, low, medium, or high acuity), which influences priority, routing, and resource requirements throughout the system. Severity is modeled as an entity attribute, allowing patient heterogeneity to be explicitly represented from the moment of arrival.
	
	Patients arrive every 6–10 minutes on average. A random draw assigns severity:

	High severity (20%)
	Medium severity (50%)
	Low severity (30%)

	Severity becomes an entity attribute that drives all downstream decisions.
	
11.2 Triage, Consultation, and Treatment Logic

	After arrival, patients pass through a sequence of clinical activities such as triage, medical consultation, and treatment. Each step is represented by a processing block with its own service-time distribution and resource requirements. Queues naturally form when demand exceeds available capacity, and the flow logic reflects real operational rules, such as mandatory triage before consultation and treatment.
	
	Example:

	Triage uses a nurse resource
	Consultation uses a doctor resource
	Treatment uses a doctor and a bed

	Patients move sequentially through these blocks, accumulating waiting and service times.
	
11.3 Multi-Resource Activities

	Certain hospital activities require multiple resources simultaneously, such as a doctor and a nurse, or a treatment room and medical equipment. These are modeled using multi-resource processing blocks, ensuring that service only starts when all required resources are available. This allows DESK to capture realistic coordination constraints and their impact on waiting times and throughput.
	
	Example:
	Treatment begins only when:

	1 doctor >> and << 1 bed are both available.

	If either is unavailable, the patient waits, increasing congestion and system time.
	
11.4 Conditional and Probabilistic Decisions

	Not all patients follow the same path. After consultation, routing decisions may depend on patient severity or clinical outcomes. For example, severe patients may be admitted for treatment, while others are discharged or sent for additional tests. These routing rules are modeled using conditional and probabilistic decision blocks, enabling branching flows that reflect uncertainty and clinical judgment.
	
	Example:
	After consultation:
	60% of low-severity patients are discharged
	40% are sent to treatment
	High-severity patients are always sent to treatment

	This logic is implemented using decision blocks driven by attributes and probabilities.
	
11.5 Cost and Revenue Attribution

	Each activity in the hospital can generate costs (e.g., staff time, resource usage) and, in some cases, revenues (e.g., reimbursements per treated patient). DESK allows financial attributes to be assigned and accumulated as patients move through the system. This makes it possible to analyze not only operational performance (waiting time, utilization) but also economic outcomes, such as cost per patient and overall financial balance.
	
	Example:
	Consultation costs R$150
	Treatment costs R$500 per patient
	Successful discharge generates R$800

	The model produces not only operational KPIs, but also financial performance metrics.

12. Case Study II — Call Center with Retrials

	This case study focuses on telecommunication and service systems where capacity is limited and customers may retry after being blocked. It highlights congestion effects and advanced event monitoring.
	
12.1 Loss Systems and Blocking Probability

	In a call center with limited lines or agents, incoming calls may be blocked if all resources are busy. These systems are known as loss systems.

	Example:
	If all agents are busy when a call arrives:
	the call is blocked,
	blocking probability is recorded as a key performance measure.

12.2 Retrial Loops and Delay Blocks

	Blocked customers do not necessarily leave permanently. Instead, they may retry after some delay, creating retrial loops that increase system load.

	Example: A blocked call waits between 2 and 5 minutes before retrying. This behavior is modeled using: a delay block, followed by a loop back to the arrival point.

12.3 Observer-Based Event Monitoring

	Rather than embedding statistics inside process logic, DESK uses observers to monitor events such as arrivals, blocks, retries, and service completions.

	Example: An observer counts: total calls, blocked calls, successful services, without modifying the core call-handling logic.

12.4 Custom KPIs via Model Variables

	Beyond standard metrics, DESK allows users to define custom model variables to track system behavior over time.

	Example: Custom KPIs include: average number of retrials per call, time until successful service, percentage of customers abandoning after multiple retries. These metrics provide deeper insight into service quality and customer experience.


Part VI — Experimentation Framework

13. Replication-Based Simulation

13.1 Why Replications Matter

	In Discrete Event Simulation, a single run is never enough to draw reliable conclusions. This is because simulation models use randomness (for arrivals, service times, routing decisions), meaning that each run produces different results, even with the same model.

	Replications are multiple independent runs of the same model, each using a different random seed. By repeating the simulation, we can observe how results vary and estimate average performance and uncertainty. Replications:

	Reduce randomness noise: one run may be unusually good or bad.
	Estimate expected performance: averages across replications are more reliable.
	Measure uncertainty: replications allow confidence intervals, not just point estimates.
	Support decision-making: decisions should be based on statistically stable results.

	In short, replications turn simulation outputs into statistically meaningful information, transforming a single experiment into robust evidence for analysis and comparison.

13.2 ReplicationFramework Architecture

	In DESK, the ReplicationFramework is responsible for running the same simulation model multiple times under controlled and repeatable conditions, while automatically collecting and aggregating results. At its core, the framework works as follows:

	A single SimulationModel definition is provided (structure, blocks, logic). For each replication, DESK: (i) resets the simulation environment, (ii) assigns a new (or controlled) random seed, (iii) executes the model for the specified duration and warm-up settings. Performance metrics (e.g., waiting times, utilizations, costs) are collected independently for each run. Results are then aggregated across replications, producing averages, variances, and confidence intervals.

	By automating replications, DESK ensures that simulation results are statistically sound, reproducible, and ready for comparison across scenarios—without requiring users to manually rerun or manage multiple simulations.

	After all replications are completed, DESK aggregates results by computing summary statistics such as: mean, variance, standard deviation, confidence intervals.

	This aggregation transforms raw replication outputs into robust performance indicators, allowing analysts to compare scenarios, identify trends, and support data-driven decisions with statistical confidence.

14. Factorial and Scenario Analysis

	Factorial and scenario analysis allow simulation users to systematically explore how changes in model parameters affect performance. Instead of testing one configuration at a time, DESK supports structured experiments that vary multiple inputs simultaneously, making it possible to identify key drivers, sensitivities, and trade-offs in complex systems.
	
14.1 Introduction to Factorial Experiments

	Factorial experiments evaluate all combinations of selected input factors. This approach enables analysts to study not only individual parameter effects, but also how parameters interact with each other under different conditions.
	
14.2 Defining Factors and Levels

	Factors are the input variables to be tested (e.g., number of servers, arrival rate), and levels are the specific values each factor can take. Clearly defining factors and levels ensures experiments are reproducible and interpretable.
	
14.3 Parameter Path Mapping

	Parameter path mapping links experimental factors to specific model parameters. DESK uses this mapping to automatically apply scenario configurations without modifying model code.
	
14.4 Main Effects and Interaction Effects

	Main effects measure the isolated impact of a single factor, while interaction effects capture how the effect of one factor depends on another. Together, they provide deeper insight into system behavior.
	
14.5 Exporting and Interpreting Results
	
	DESK exports experiment results in structured formats suitable for statistical analysis and visualization, supporting clear comparison of scenarios and evidence-based decision-making.

################################## 
		PAREI AQUI
################################## 
	
Part VII — Tracing, Debugging, and Transparency

15. Event Logging and Replay

	Event logging in DESK is not an afterthought or a visualization add-on. It is a first-class mechanism designed to guarantee:

	Transparency — every relevant state change is observable
	Debuggability — model logic can be validated step by step
	Reproducibility — behaviors can be replayed and audited
	Post-analysis — logs can feed statistics, plots, or process mining tools

	DESK achieves this without polluting modeling logic, using a centralized event logging architecture. DESK follows three core principles:

	Blocks emit events, they do not analyze them
	Logging is centralized and optional
	Events are structured, timestamped, and entity-aware
	
	Every relevant change in the simulation generates a structured event. Typical lifecycle events include:

	Entity creation
	Entity entering a queue
	Resource request
	Service start
	Service completion
	Entity routing decision
	Entity disposal

	Each event is generated at the exact simulation time (env.now) and forwarded to the logger.

15.1 EventLogger Structure
	
	DESK uses a central EventLogger, attached to the SimulationModel. What the EventLogger records: Each event typically contains:

	Simulation time
	Event type (e.g. QUEUE_ENTER, SERVICE_START)
	Entity ID
	Block name
	Resource name (if applicable)
	Attribute snapshot (optional)

	This structure ensures traceability of every entity across the full model. Key idea: Blocks only emit events — they never store or interpret them.

15.2 Lifecycle Events (Start, Complete, Queue)
15.3 Exporting Event Logs to CSV
15.4 Process Mining Readiness

16. Interactive Tracing and Replay

16.1 Tracing Individual Entities

	Event replay in DESK is log-driven, not simulation-driven.

	How replay works: Simulation runs normally. Events are logged in chronological order. Logs are queried after the run. A single entity (or subset) is reconstructed from events

	This allows users to answer questions like:

	Why did this entity wait so long?
	Where did congestion start?
	Which resource caused blocking?

	No re-execution of the simulation is required.
	
16.2 Filtering by Resource, Event Type, Time Window, Replay of Partial System Behavior

	DESK allows selective replay, such as:

	One entity ID
	One block or resource
	One time window
	One event type

	This avoids information overload and makes DESK usable even for large-scale models.	Typical teaching use:

	Follow one problematic entity
	Compare its path to an “average” entity


16.3 Trace Statistics and Diagnostics

	Event logs are structured datasets, not text output.

	They can be:
	Exported to CSV
	Converted into pandas DataFrames

	Used for:
	KPI reconstruction
	Timeline plots
	Process mining
	Audit trails

	This means DESK supports post-hoc analysis without rerunning models.
	
	What DESK Deliberately Does NOT Do

	To stay lightweight and flexible, DESK:

	Does not force visualization during execution
	Does not hard-code KPIs into blocks
	Does not mix logging with statistical aggregation

	Those concerns are handled by:
	Observers
	Analyzers
	External tools (pandas, matplotlib, process mining)
	
	DESK treats event logging as a transparent, structured, replayable history of everything that happened — separating “what the model does” from “how we analyze it.”

Part VIII — Analysis, Metrics, and Visualization

17. Performance Metrics

	Performance metrics in DESK are derived after the simulation run, using structured event logs and observers rather than being hard-coded inside blocks. This separation ensures transparency, reproducibility, and flexibility in analysis.

17.1 Entity-Level Metrics (System Time, Waiting Time)

	Entity-level metrics describe the experience of individual entities as they flow through the system.

	Typical metrics include:

	System Time: total time an entity spends in the system, from creation to disposal

	Waiting Time: cumulative time spent waiting in queues

	Service Time: cumulative processing time across all activities

	In DESK, these metrics are reconstructed from timestamped lifecycle events (e.g., arrival, queue entry, service start, service end, exit). They allow analysts to:

	Compare variability across entities
	Identify outliers and extreme delays
	Analyze performance by entity type, priority, or attribute

	Entity-level metrics are especially useful in service systems where equity, responsiveness, and delay distributions matter as much as averages.

17.2 Resource Utilization and Occupancy

	Resource metrics describe how intensively system resources are used over time. Key measures include:

	Utilization: fraction of simulation time a resource is busy
	Occupancy: number of resource units in use at a given time
	Idle Time: periods when capacity is available but unused

	DESK computes these metrics from resource seize and release events, ensuring precise time accounting. They enable analysts to:

	Detect bottlenecks and overloading
	Identify underutilized or excess capacity
	Evaluate staffing and capacity decisions
	
	Resource-level metrics connect operational performance directly to cost and investment decisions.

17.3 Block-Level Statistics

	Block-level statistics aggregate performance information at the activity or station level, independent of individual entities. Typical block metrics include:

	Average queue length
	Average waiting time at the block
	Throughput per block
	Time-in-block distributions

	Because every block in DESK emits standardized events, statistics can be computed uniformly across all block types. Block-level metrics help:

	Locate where congestion forms
	Compare alternative process designs
	Understand local vs global performance effects

	They provide a structural view of the system, complementing entity- and resource-level analyses.

17.4 WIP and Flow Metrics

	Work-in-Process (WIP) and flow metrics describe the global dynamic behavior of the system over time. Core measures include:

	WIP: number of entities inside the system at any time
	Arrival Rate and Departure Rate
	Throughput over time
	Flow Time distributions

	In DESK, WIP is tracked using entity creation and disposal events, enabling:

	Time-series plots of system congestion
	Validation of steady-state behavior
	Application of flow laws (e.g., Little’s Law)

	These metrics reveal system-level dynamics that are not visible from local or average statistics alone, making them essential for diagnosing instability or overload.

18. Warm-Up and Stability Analysis

	Discrete-event simulations of non-terminating systems typically start from empty and idle conditions, which do not represent long-run behavior. Section 18 explains how DESK identifies and mitigates this initialization bias, and how it evaluates whether the system reaches a stable operating regime.

18.1 Detecting Transient Bias

	Transient bias occurs when early simulation observations are systematically distorted by artificial initial conditions, such as empty queues and idle resources.

	In DESK, transient bias is detected by:

	Monitoring time-series metrics (e.g., WIP, waiting time, utilization)
	Identifying systematic trends or drifts in early simulation periods
	Comparing early and late observations within the same run or across replications

	Typical symptoms include:

	Underestimated waiting times
	Overestimated service levels
	Rapid growth of WIP from zero

	DESK treats transient bias as a data quality problem, not a modeling flaw. The objective is not to “fix” the model, but to exclude non-representative data from performance analysis.

18.2 Warm-Up Analyzer Workflow

	The Warm-Up Analyzer in DESK provides a structured and repeatable workflow to remove transient effects. A typical workflow consists of:

	Run the simulation with logging enabled: Collect time-stamped observations for key metrics.

	Segment the time series into windows: Metrics are evaluated over successive intervals rather than instantaneously.

	Evaluate convergence behavior: The analyzer checks when metrics stabilize around a consistent level.

	Determine warm-up length: A warm-up time is selected based on statistical or heuristic criteria.

	Truncate initial observations: All data before the warm-up point is discarded for performance evaluation.

18.3 Stability Conditions and Bottleneck Detection

	Stability analysis in DESK evaluates whether the system can reach a steady-state under given parameters. A system is considered unstable if:

	WIP grows unbounded over time
	Queues increase without limit
	Key performance metrics fail to converge

	DESK assesses stability by:
	Observing long-run WIP trends
	Checking convergence of throughput and utilization
	Comparing arrival rates to effective service capacity
	
	Once stability is established, DESK uses resource utilization and queue metrics to identify bottlenecks, defined as:

	Resources with persistently high utilization
	Blocks where queues accumulate
	Activities limiting system throughput

	This analysis supports:
	Capacity planning
	Policy evaluation
	Structural redesign of the system

	Conceptual Summary
	Aspect				Question Answered
	Transient Bias		Are early results misleading?
	Warm-Up				Which data should be ignored?
	Stability			Does the system converge?
	Bottlenecks			What limits performance?

19. Visualization and Reporting

	Visualization and reporting in DESK are designed to translate simulation outputs into insight, not merely to decorate results. All visualizations and reports are generated after simulation execution, using structured logs and aggregated metrics, ensuring reproducibility and analytical rigor.

19.1 Resource Utilization Over Time

	Resource Utilization Over Time focuses on time-dependent visualization of resource usage, rather than single average values.
	
	Typical visualizations include:
	Utilization time series
	Occupancy step functions
	Busy vs idle intervals

	By plotting resource usage over time, DESK allows analysts to:
	Identify transient overloads and idle periods
	Detect synchronization problems between resources
	Observe how utilization evolves before and after warm-up

	These plots are particularly useful for:
	Staffing analysis
	Shift design
	Understanding variability-driven congestion

	Time-based utilization visualization reveals dynamics that average utilization alone cannot capture.

19.2 WIP and System Time Distributions

	WIP and System Time Distributions addresses distributional behavior, not just mean performance. Key visual outputs include:
	
	Histograms of system time
	Empirical cumulative distribution functions (CDFs)
	Time-series plots of WIP

	DESK uses entity-level timestamps to construct:
	System time distributions (from entry to exit)
	Waiting time distributions
	WIP trajectories over the simulation horizon

	These visualizations help analysts:
	Assess variability and risk
	Identify long-tail delays
	Evaluate service-level compliance (e.g., percentiles)

	They are essential when performance requirements depend on quantiles rather than averages.

19.3 Activity-Level Dashboards

	Activity-level dashboards provide a localized performance view for each block or process step. Typical dashboard components include:

	Average and percentile waiting times per block
	Queue length statistics
	Throughput per activity
	Resource utilization associated with each block

	Because DESK blocks emit standardized events, dashboards can be generated consistently across the entire model.

	These dashboards allow users to: 
	Compare activities side by side
	Identify local inefficiencies
	Support targeted process improvements

	They are particularly effective, as they visually link process structure to performance outcomes.

19.4 Automated Textual Reports

Part IX — Financial and Business Analysis

20. Financial Modeling in DES

	Financial modeling in DESK links operational behavior to economic outcomes, allowing simulation results to support managerial and policy decisions rather than only technical performance evaluation.
	
20.1 Cost Attribution by Activity

	DESK assigns costs to activities and resources based on their usage during simulation. Costs are typically attributed:

	Per unit of time a resource is busy
	Per execution of an activity
	Per entity processed

	Cost attribution relies on resource utilization and activity duration events, ensuring that financial costs reflect actual system behavior rather than static assumptions.

20.2 Revenue Generation at Disposal

	Revenue generation is modeled at the point where entities exit the system, representing completed services or products. In DESK, revenue can depend on:

	Entity attributes (type, priority, service level)
	Completion time or delays
	Routing path followed

	By associating revenue with entity disposal events, DESK ensures that only successfully completed flows generate value, enabling realistic profit analysis.

20.3 Financial KPIs (Profit, Margin, Cost Breakdown)

	DESK aggregates costs and revenues to compute financial performance indicators, such as: Total cost, Total revenue, Profit or loss, Contribution margins, or Cost breakdown by resource or activity.

	These KPIs provide a concise financial summary of each simulation scenario, supporting comparison between alternative designs or policies.

Part X — Advanced Topics

21. Observers and Model Variables

	Observers and model variables provide a non-intrusive way to monitor, measure, and extend simulation behavior in DESK. They allow analysts to extract information and define new metrics without modifying block or entity logic, preserving model clarity and correctness.

21.1 Observer Pattern in DESK

	DESK implements the Observer design pattern to decouple simulation execution from data collection and analysis. In this pattern:

	Simulation components (blocks, resources, entities) emit events
	Observers subscribe to specific event types
	Observers react to events without influencing system behavior
	
	This architecture enables:
	Clean separation between model logic and analytics
	Multiple observers monitoring the same simulation
	Easy extension of analysis capabilities

	Observers act as passive listeners, ensuring that monitoring does not alter simulation outcomes.

21.2 Monitoring Events Without Polluting Logic

	Instead of:
	Adding counters inside activities
	Hard-coding KPIs into blocks
	
	DESK uses observers to:
	Track queue lengths
	Measure waiting and service times
	Monitor resource states
	Capture conditional or rare events

	This approach keeps:
	Block code simple and reusable
	Measurement logic centralized
	Models easier to validate and maintain
	It is especially important in teaching and research, where model transparency and correctness are critical.

21.3 Custom KPIs via ModelVariableTracker

	The ModelVariableTracker allows users to define custom, user-specific KPIs at the model level. Typical uses include:

	Tracking system-wide counters
	Measuring conditional performance (e.g., delays for high-priority entities)
	Monitoring dynamic state variables (e.g., WIP by class)

	These variables are:
	Updated via observers
	Time-stamped and traceable
	Available for post-simulation analysis

	The tracker enables rapid experimentation with new metrics without restructuring the model, supporting exploratory analysis and advanced studies.

22. Extending DESK
	
	DESK is designed as an extensible simulation framework, allowing users to adapt the core engine to new domains, policies, and analytical techniques without modifying existing models.
	
22.1 Creating Custom Blocks

	users can extend DESK by defining new block types that encapsulate specialized logic. Custom blocks:

	Inherit from BaseBlock
	Implement specific process behavior
	Emit standard lifecycle events

	They allow users to model domain-specific activities (e.g., inspections, batching, rework) while preserving compatibility with DESK’s logging, tracing, and analysis tools.

22.2 Adding New Resource Policies
	
	DESK supports extension of resource behavior beyond standard capacity constraints. Users can introduce:

	Custom priority rules
	Preemption or reservation logic
	Shift-based or availability-constrained resources

	By adding new resource policies, DESK can represent complex operational rules without altering block-level logic, maintaining modularity and clarity.

22.3 Plugging in Optimization and AI Modules

	Typical integrations include:
	Parameter tuning via simulation–optimization loops
	Reinforcement learning for dynamic decision policies
	Heuristic or metaheuristic search over scenarios

	DESK’s clear separation between model execution and experimentation makes it suitable for automated exploration of design and policy alternatives.

22.4 Integration with Process Mining and Digital Twins

	DESK’s structured event logs enable seamless integration with external analytical ecosystems. Event data can be:

	Exported to process mining tools for discovery and conformance checking
	Used to calibrate or validate digital twin models
	Compared against real operational logs
	
	This integration allows DESK models to evolve from static simulations into living digital representations of real systems.


Part XI — Deployment and Visualization Interfaces

23. Interactive Visualization Interfaces

23.1 Real-Time Simulation Visualization
23.2 Educational and Teaching Use Cases
23.3 Scenario Comparison Interfaces

Part XII — Appendices
Appendix A — Common Modeling Patterns
Appendix B — Mapping DESK to Classical DES Literature
Appendix C — Complete Example Codes

#########################################


A. Where to Host the DESK Code Repository
Strong Recommendation: GitHub (Primary)

Why GitHub is the best default choice for DESK:

	Largest audience by far
	Dominant platform in:
	Python ecosystem
	Simulation / OR community
	Academia + industry
	Most students already have GitHub accounts
	Ecosystem advantages
	Native integration with:
	Read the Docs
	Zenodo (for DOI)
	GitHub Pages
	CI/CD (testing, packaging)
	Easy pip packaging pipelines
	Citation and visibility
	GitHub repositories are routinely cited in:
		Journal papers
		Theses
		Technical reports
	Zenodo ↔ GitHub DOI integration is almost standard in research software
	Lower adoption friction

“Clone from GitHub” is expected

Tutorials, notebooks, issues, discussions all in one place

📌 Verdict:
👉 GitHub should be the main public repository for DESK

==============================
Recommended Repository Structure

DESK/
├── desk/                 # Core framework
├── examples/             # Book & tutorial examples
├── notebooks/            # Teaching notebooks
├── experiments/          # Replication / factorial demos
├── docs/                 # Documentation source
├── tests/
├── pyproject.toml
├── README.md
├── CITATION.cff
└── LICENSE

==============================

B. Where to Publish the Book / Documentation (Citable)

You actually need two layers:

High-access documentation

Formally citable scientific artifact

1. Documentation for Learning & Adoption
Read the Docs (Highly Recommended)
	Free for open source
	Automatic builds from GitHub
	Widely trusted in Python ecosystem
	Indexed by Google Scholar (indirectly)
	Supports:
		Tutorials
		API reference
		Figures, math, citations

📌 This should be your “living book”

Examples users already trust:

SimPy documentation

SciPy

==============================

Option A — Open-Access Book + DOI (Highly Recommended)
Zenodo + GitHub Release (Best Scientific Practice)

How it works:

Write the book in:

LaTeX

Markdown (Jupyter Book)

Create a release on GitHub

Zenodo automatically assigns a DOI

Advantages:

Fully citable

Free and open

Indexed by Google Scholar

Accepted in theses, dissertations, and articles

No publisher gatekeeping

📌 This is the current gold standard for research software books

============================

Recommended Combined Strategy (Best of All Worlds)
Canonical Setup (Strong Recommendation)
Component			Platform
Code				GitHub
Documentation		Read the Docs
Book source			LaTeX in GitHub
DOI					Zenodo (linked to GitHub releases)
Citation file		CITATION.cff
License				MIT (recommended)

===================

How Users Will Experience DESK

Discover DESK via:

GitHub

Google Scholar

Courses

Papers

Learn DESK via:

Read the Docs (tutorial-style)

Jupyter Book (chapter flow)

Cite DESK via:

DOI from Zenodo

Book reference

Software citation

=====================================
DESK citation standard

Canonical Software Citation (DOI-based)

Recommended citation (APA / generic):

Author(s). (Year). DESK: Discrete Event Simulation Kit (Version X.Y.Z) [Computer software]. DOI

Example:

Almeida, J.F.F, & collaborators. (2025). DESK: Discrete Event Simulation Kit (v1.2.0) [Computer software]. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.XXXXXXX

=======

Open-Access Book Citation

Author(s). (Year). DESK: A Practical Framework for Discrete-Event Simulation in Python. Open-access book. DOI

Example:

Almeida, J.F.F. (2025). DESK: A Practical Framework for Discrete-Event Simulation in Python. Open-access book. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.YYYYYYY

Provide this directly in the repository.

Software BibTeX
@software{desk_software,
  author  = {Silva, J. and others},
  title   = {DESK: Discrete Event Simulation Kit},
  year    = {2025},
  version = {1.2.0},
  doi     = {10.5281/zenodo.XXXXXXX},
  url     = {https://github.com/your-org/DESK}
}

Book BibTeX
@book{desk_book,
  author    = {Almeida, J.F.F.},
  title     = {DESK: A Practical Framework for Discrete-Event Simulation in Python},
  year      = {2025},
  publisher = {Zenodo},
  doi       = {10.5281/zenodo.YYYYYYY},
  url       = {https://desk.readthedocs.io}
}


CITATION.cff (Strongly Recommended)

Place a CITATION.cff file at the root of the GitHub repository.

cff-version: 1.2.0
title: "DESK: Discrete Event Simulation Kit"
message: "If you use DESK in your research, please cite it as follows."
authors:
  - family-names: Almeida
    given-names: João Flávio de Freitas
version: 1.2.0
date-released: 2025-03-01
doi: 10.5281/zenodo.XXXXXXX
url: https://github.com/your-org/DESK
license: MIT


==================================================
Design a book-to-code synchronization workflow
==================================================
DESK Book–Code Synchronization Workflow

Core Principle (Non-Negotiable)

The code is the single source of truth.
The book never owns logic — it only explains and executes code.

1. Repository-Level Architecture
Single Canonical Repository (Recommended)

DESK/
├── desk/                    # Core framework (library)
├── examples/                # Canonical runnable examples
│   ├── basic_queue/
│   ├── branching_flow/
│   ├── hospital_case/
│   └── experiments/
├── notebooks/               # Teaching notebooks (import examples)
├── book/                    # Book source (LaTeX)
│   ├── chapters/
│   ├── figures/
│   └── references.bib
├── docs/                    # API documentation (Sphinx)
├── tests/
├── pyproject.toml
├── CITATION.cff
└── README.md

📌 Key rule:
Examples live in /examples, never inside the book.


2. Code Ownership Rules (What goes where)
Component	Owns Logic?	Purpose
/desk		✅ Yes		Framework behavior
/examples	✅ Yes		Reference implementations
/notebooks	❌ No		Didactic wrappers
/book		❌ No		Explanation + execution
/docs		❌ No		APP reference

The book imports and executes examples — it never reimplements them.

3. Example-Driven Chapters
Each book chapter is mapped to one example folder.

examples/hospital_case/
├── model.py
├── parameters.py
├── run.py
└── README.md

Chapter 11 — Hospital Emergency Flow
├── Conceptual model
├── Explanation of blocks
├── Code snippets (imported)
├── Executed outputs
└── Discussion of results

📌 The chapter references code, not copies it.

10. Minimal Rules to Publish in the Book

You may want to enforce these as contributor rules:
	No code in the book without a matching example
	No example without a test or runnable script
	No chapter without CI execution
	No release without DOI

One-Sentence Summary: DESK’s book does not describe code — it executes it, validates it, and cites it.

================================================
Suggest license wording
================================================
License Recommendations for DESK
Executive Recommendation (Short Answer)

DESK source code: MIT License
Book & documentation: Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY 4.0)
Examples & notebooks: MIT (same as code)

This combination is:
Standard in scientific software
Friendly to academia, industry, and teaching
Compatible with journals, theses, and funding agencies
Low-friction for users

1. License for DESK Source Code
Recommended: MIT License
Why MIT is ideal for DESK

Permissive (maximizes adoption)
Allows academic + commercial use
Compatible with Python ecosystem
Simple, readable, widely trusted
Used by: NumPy, SciPy, SimPy, NetworkX

MIT License — Standard Wording (Use As-Is)

Create a file named LICENSE at the repository root:

MIT License

Copyright (c) 2025 João F. F. Almeida and DESK contributors

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions: The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.


CC BY 4.0 — Suggested Wording

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0).

You are free to:
- Share — copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format
- Adapt — remix, transform, and build upon the material for any purpose, even commercially

Under the following terms:
- Attribution — You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to the license, and indicate if changes were made.

Full license text: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/


5. License Summary (Put This in README.md)

Add a short, explicit section:

## License

- DESK source code and examples are licensed under the MIT License.
- The DESK book and documentation are licensed under Creative Commons
  Attribution 4.0 (CC BY 4.0).

See the LICENSE file and documentation for details.

Optional: Contributor License Statement

In CONTRIBUTING.md (short and simple):

By contributing to DESK, you agree that your contributions
will be licensed under the MIT License.

==============================================
Draft a README + CITATION.cff
==============================================
README.md (Draft)

# DESK — Discrete Event Simulation Kit

**DESK** is an open-source, block-based **Discrete-Event Simulation (DES) framework** built on top of **SimPy** and **Python**.  
It is designed for **teaching, research, and real-world decision support**, emphasizing transparency, reproducibility, and extensibility.

DESK enables users to build simulation models using modular blocks, run statistically sound experiments, and analyze operational and financial performance with full traceability.

---

## Key Features

- Block-based modeling (Create, Process, Decide, Dispose, etc.)
- Entity attributes and priority handling
- Resource modeling with queues, preemption, and policies
- Centralized event logging and replay
- Observer-based metrics and custom KPIs
- Replications, warm-up analysis, and scenario experiments
- Financial modeling integrated with operational metrics
- Designed for reproducible, citable scientific work

---

## Getting Started

### Installation
```bash
pip install desk-sim

(or install from source)

git clone https://github.com/your-org/DESK.git
cd DESK
pip install -e .


Minimal Example

from desk import SimulationModel
from desk.blocks import CreateBlock, ProcessBlock, DisposeBlock

model = SimulationModel()

create = CreateBlock(model, interarrival_time=lambda: 5)
process = ProcessBlock(model, service_time=lambda: 8, resource="server")
dispose = DisposeBlock(model)

create.connect(process)
process.connect(dispose)
model.run(until=1000)


Documentation and Book

📘 Book / Tutorial: https://desk.readthedocs.io

📚 API Reference: https://desk.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api.html

🧪 Examples: see the /examples directory

📓 Teaching Notebooks: see the /notebooks directory

The book is fully synchronized with the codebase and all examples are executable.

How to Cite DESK

If you use DESK in academic work, please cite it.

Software Citation (Recommended)

Almeida, J.F.F., et al. (2025). DESK: Discrete Event Simulation Kit (v1.2.0) [Computer software]. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.XXXXXXX

BibTeX and additional citation formats are available via GitHub’s “Cite this repository” button.

License
	Source code and examples: MIT License
	Book and documentation: Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 (CC BY 4.0)

See the LICENSE file for details.

Contributing

Contributions are welcome.
Please see CONTRIBUTING.md for guidelines.

By contributing to DESK, you agree that your contributions will be licensed under the MIT License.

Acknowledgements
	DESK builds upon the SimPy ecosystem and draws inspiration from classical discrete-event simulation literature.

Contact

Project homepage: https://github.com/your-org/DESK

Documentation: https://desk.readthedocs.io


---

# **CITATION.cff (Draft)**

```yaml
cff-version: 1.2.0
title: "DESK: Discrete Event Simulation Kit"
message: "If you use DESK in your research, please cite it as follows."
type: software
authors:
  - family-names: Almeida
    given-names: João Flávio F.
    affiliation: Federal University of Minas Gerais
    orcid: https://orcid.org/0000-0000-0000-0000
version: 1.2.0
date-released: 2025-03-01
doi: 10.5281/zenodo.XXXXXXX
url: https://github.com/your-org/DESK
license: MIT
keywords:
  - discrete-event simulation
  - simulation
  - SimPy
  - operations research
  - systems modeling
preferred-citation:
  type: software
  authors:
    - family-names: Silva
      given-names: João
  title: "DESK: Discrete Event Simulation Kit"
  year: 2025
  version: 1.2.0
  doi: 10.5281/zenodo.XXXXXXX

==========================================================
Map this to CAPES / CNPq / international evaluation criteria
==========================================================

Mapping DESK to CAPES / CNPq / International Evaluation Criteria
1. CAPES (Brazil – Graduate Program Evaluation)

CAPES evaluates intellectual production, innovation, impact, and training capacity.

1.1 DESK as Intellectual Production

DESK qualifies as multiple recognized production types:

DESK Component	CAPES Category
Open-source software with DOI	Produção Técnica / Tecnológica
Open-access book with DOI	Livro / Capítulo de Livro
Documentation + tutorials	Material Didático Qualificado
Examples and notebooks	Formação de Recursos Humanos

📌 CAPES explicitly recognizes:

software,

computational tools,

methodological frameworks
when they are public, documented, and citable.

1.2 Evidence of Scientific Rigor (CAPES Language)

DESK meets CAPES expectations for rigor by:

Explicit methodology (simulation theory)

Reproducibility (versioned code + DOI)

Transparency (event logs, observers)

Validation procedures (warm-up, stability)

You can explicitly state:

“DESK is a reproducible computational research infrastructure with versioned releases and DOI registration, aligned with open science principles.”

1.3 Impact and Visibility

CAPES values:

adoption,

citations,

national and international reach.

DESK supports this via:

GitHub visibility

Zenodo DOI (indexed by Google Scholar)

Open-access book

Use in theses, dissertations, and courses

📌 This strengthens Programa Conceito 5–7 narratives.

1.4 How to Register in CAPES / Sucupira

You may report DESK as:

Produção Técnica: Software

Livro Didático-Científico

Material de Apoio à Formação

And cite:

DOI

GitHub URL

Documentation URL

2. CNPq (Grants, Productivity Fellowships)

CNPq evaluates originality, leadership, innovation, and impact.

2.1 DESK as Technological Innovation

DESK qualifies as:

Produto Tecnológico

Infraestrutura de Pesquisa

Ferramenta Metodológica Original

Especially strong if:

Applied to public systems (health, logistics)

Used in funded projects

Cited in articles and theses

📌 This aligns with Bolsa PQ and Editais de Inovação.

2.2 Open Science Alignment (Very Important for CNPq)

DESK explicitly satisfies:

Open access

Reusable research artifacts

FAIR principles (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, Reusable)

This can be stated verbatim in proposals.

2.3 Lattes CV Classification

You should list DESK in three places:
	Produção Técnica
		Tipo: Software
		DOI: Zenodo
		URL: GitHub

Produção Bibliográfica
	Livro (open access)
	DOI

Orientações
	Theses using DESK
	Courses based on DESK

📌 This multiplicity strengthens evaluation.

##################################

How to use it (next 5 minutes)

Copy the structure into your DESK repository

Replace <username> with your GitHub username

Run locally:

pip install mkdocs mkdocs-material
mkdocs serve


Deploy:

mkdocs gh-deploy


Your site will be live at:

https://joaoflavioufmg.github.io/desk